Let's talk about Qwik and
basically the two properties that it has.
So it's resumable and it's progressive.
So what do we mean by resumable?
So when I first heard about virtual
machines, my mind was blown away.
And specifically was the fact that,
let's say you had a Windows
machine you could boot up a Linux
inside of your Windows machine, right?
That was kind of cool but then,
inside of the Linux machine you would
actually watch it boot,
you would actually see the BIOS run again.
And then the whole boot up process would
run and then you get to the login page and
you could log in and then open up
an application like spreadsheet and
start working on your spreadsheet, right?
But the thing that really blew my mind
is the fact that you could now pause
the application, to pause the virtual
machine and you would save it to a file.
You could take this file to a different
machine, physical machine, and
there you could open it and there you
would skip the boot up process, right?
You would literally just open
it where you left off and
there would be no boot up, right?
There would be no watching the boot
up system go or login page or
anything like you literally
started where you left off.
And that's what the resumability is,
right?
If you have the full information of the
system, then you can skip, the boot up.
And if you think about it, hydration is
the boot up process that's happening.
And so instead of saving the state
of the system into the file,
we can save the system into the HTML.
And this is what the resumability is.
Is that on a server,
when we do pre-rendering, right?
When we pre-render the application,
we go through the full boot up process,
there we don't have a choice,
we have to run all the code.
But then at some point we serialize
everything into the HTML.
And once we serialize the HTML,
the HTML can be either shipped
to a different client or
it could be saved in a CDN or it could be
a pre-rendered content, it doesn't matter.
Once you get the HTML,
you can just continue where you left off.
And the continuing of the left off, the
the real value there is not necessarily
the amount of JavaScript
that you download,
it is the fact that you don't have to
execute all the JavaScript again, right?
The real value is lazy execution
of the code that you don't need.
And so if you think about it,
what's happening in
the hydration is that in the server, you
execute the whole application, then you
have to serialize the application,
then you download the HTML, right?
And then guess what, you have to replay
all of the application again, right?
This big box here, this code and
this code are the same thing.
You are redoing the work
that the server already did.
And this what makes hydration slower
because you are doing stuff unnecessarily
twice, right?
And so the user interaction
is pushed down over here.
And so in the case of resumability, you
still have to do this stuff on a server.
You do the serialization,
which we call the pause.
And then on the client,
you don't have to do anything,
because you just continue where
you left off on a server.
But that requires that the client
can serialize not just
the state of the application.
The HTML serializes also the component
boundaries, the listeners,
it serializes the reactivity graphs so
that it understands that if you
modify data here, what other
component needs to get re-rendered.
And if you can you serialize all of these
things then hydration becomes unnecessary.
Because what hydration is, is a way for
the framework to recover information about
the application by executing
the application, right?
Resumability is basically saying,
I don't need to recover it
by re-executing everything.
I can recover it by just reading
a bunch of stuff out of the JSON.
And because it's just reading out of the
JSON and JSON deserialization is extremely
fast, the hydration cost
is extremely cheap, right?
Sorry, the resumability cost is
very cheap because you can just
wait until the user clicks.
It's only at that point that you need
to actually deserialize the JSON.
Because the JSON deserialization is very,
very quick.
I think we have some numbers that
basically says that for the most
applications you would build, the initial
JSON deserialization adds something
like the 20 millisecond range on initial
click, which basically is nothing, right?
But the real reason why it's so
little is because you don't have to
execute any application code, right?
You literally just have to
do JSON.parse nothing else.
So the big difference
between hydration and
resumability is that the resumability
doesn't require execution of
the application code to continue where
I left off, and that's the key, right?
Because if you don't require application
code to be present or executed,
that's how you can get the real
improvements in speed, right?
Because frameworks like solid are better
at executing code that improve that,
we just don't even do it.
And it's hard to make something
faster than doing nothing,
it's the ultimate in speed,
right, you just don't do it.
Okay, so the second bit here
is that a Qwik is progressive.
And what we mean by this
is that normal frameworks,
they basically download all the code and
execute all the code.
And so the amount of JavaScript that's
required to run your site is essentially
constant.
Now this might go up if you've
done some lazy loading, but
it's kinda tricky because lazy loading
in existing systems is only useful for
components that are not
currently in the render tree.
The moment the component
is in the render tree,
if it's behind a laser loaded boundary,
it doesn't matter.
The framework has to cross over
that lazy loaded boundary,
it has to eagerly download,
it has to eagerly execute it.
Just to figure out is,
are there any listeners over there, right?
And so lazy loading in the current
frameworks is only useful for
basically the other route, only for things
that are currently not in the render tree.
The beauty of Qwik is that quick
can lazy load or more importantly,
as I said,
execute only the code as you need it.
And so the whole code download
in Qwik is very progressive.
We start essentially at zero and
as you do interactions more and
more code gets executed, right?
Maybe this just says downloaded
JavaScript, but better way of thinking
about it is the amount of code executed
rather than downloaded, right?.
So the thing that you really
wanna look at is what percent
of the application has been executed?
So if you look at the code coverage,
right,
that's the thing you really care about.
And so in the case of existing systems,
there's a huge code coverage initial jump.
Because you executed pretty much
the whole application in order to figure
out where are the listeners, and
then it stays pretty stable.
Whereas in a progressive system,
you basically start with nothing.
And as you interact with the page
more things happen, right?
So again, going back to the shopping cart
example, when I navigate to the page,
no Javascript, right?
It's only when I click on a button
that says Add to shopping cart,
does that listener for
that button execute, right?
And it is at the point of execution of
that listener, does the listener go and
modify some kind of state of the system.
And then modification of the state of the
system tells the framework that there is
the reactivity graph.
And the framework now knows, you modifying
this state of the system requires me to go
re-render the shopping cart component.
And so the shopping cart component
gets executed and re-rendered, right?
And the fact that there were many many
components around you, that did other
things like a complicated menu system
to check on the status of your thing or
log out or go to preferences or whatever.
None of that matters, because
the reactivity graph understands this.
And that actually brings
up a very good point,
which is that resumable
systems require reactivity.
Because if you don't have reactivity,
then the moment I click on a button,
the framework's like,
something changed, I have no idea what,
let's just go to the root component and
re-render everything.
Which is kinda what many frameworks do,
right?
And if you do that,
then you just lost the battle.
Right, because on first interaction you
have to download and execute everything.
And so, reactivity is a strong
prerequisite for resumability.
Because unless you are reactive unless
you understand the reactivity graph,
you will end up just
re-executing everything.
And that brings us to another next point
which is lead and there are Are already
reactive systems out there, like,
for example, Solid Js and svelte.
So can't they add reactivity?
Not so simple, the problem is that
all reactive systems require that you
execute the application once in
order to build the reactivity graph.
And again,
that kind of ruins your day from
the point of view of resumability, right?
So the hard part is, or the tricky part
here is, one, you have to be reactive.
And the second bit is that reactivity
graph must be serializable on
the server so that when the system
wakes up on the client, it can reason
about the application without
the application code being present.
And that's the key point here,
you wanna reason about the system.
You wanna know that changing
this requires me to render that.
And you wanna have that information
without the application code
being present.
And that's the hard part, that's really
what the key to reasonability is.
If you can do that, if you can reason
about the system without the application
code being present,
then that's resumability.
That allows you to be very surgical about
the kind of code that you download and
execute.
So that you can just, know that I have
to execute the button that clicks on
the shopping cart and I know I have
to re-render the shopping cart.
And all the other code on the page is
irrelevant I can ignore that code,
I don't need to download it,
I don't need to execute it,
I don't have to have a present.
Okay, so
kind of the lay of the land here is that,
in my opinion, there are two
kinds of frameworks out there.
There are what I would call
replayable frameworks, right?
And what I mean by replayable is that
in order for this frameworks to run,
they have to replay the same
thing the server just did.
And then there are resumable frameworks,
which is a set of frameworks that can
continue where the server left off.
And this continuing where the server
left off is really the magical bit that
allows you to be performant, right?
Because it is the thing that turns
the problem of, let me download the whole
application, which is kind of unbound in
size as the application gets more and
more complicated, like the amount of code
you download is bigger and bigger and
bigger, right?
Which is the reason why a Hello World
could be 100 on 100 on any platform, but
once it hits the real world requirements,
nobody can get 100 out of 100.
And a resumable system is that
basically you can think of
it as turning everything into an island,
but
they do it in a way where it doesn't
change your developer experience.
You don't have to now think about it,
it's just how the system works.
But there's another important thing about
turning everything to an island, which is,
if you look at existing systems like
Astro, the moment an island gets hydrated,
they have to hydrate the whole thing.
Whereas Qwik, or these resumable systems
have this property that just because
a component somewhere in the hierarchy
got re-rendered, it doesn't mean
that the parent component or
the child component have to be rendered.
And if they don't have to be rendered,
it also means they don't have
to be downloaded, right?
So the hard part here is to be able to
re-render a component in the middle of
the hierarchy tree.
And that's something that
most systems cannot do.
Most systems have a very strict,
start at the top, go to the leaves,
kind of a mental model.
And yes, they can prune the tree a little
bit so they don't have to do the whole
tree, but for the most part,
they have to do the whole tree.